Add WinForms whatsnew (#1742)
dotnet/docs-desktop: dotnet-desktop-guide/net/winforms/whats-new/net80.md

## Visual Studio DPI improvements

Visual Studio 2022 17.8 Introduces DPI-unwaware designer tabs. Previously, the Windows Designer tab in Visual Studio ran at the DPI of Visual Studio. This causes problems when you're designing a DPI-unaware Windows Forms app. Now you can ensure that the designer runs at the same scale as you want the app to run, either DPI-aware or not. Before this feature was introduced, you had to run Visual Studio in DPI-unaware mode, which made Visual Studio itself blurry when scaling was applied in Windows. Now you can leave Visual Studio alone and let the designer run DPI-unaware.

You can enable the DPI-unaware designer for the Windows Forms project by adding `<ForceDesignerDPIUnaware>` to the project file, and setting the value to `true`.

:::code language="xml" source="./snippets/net80/csharp/snippets.csproj" range="3-11" highlight="7":::

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > After changing this setting, you must unload and reload your project to get Visual Studio to respect it.

Reviewer: you might mention that by adding this to the project file the next time your project is loaded it will respect the new setting.

Author: ```suggestion
> Visual Studio reads this setting when the project is loaded, and not when it's changed. After changing this setting, unload and reload your project to get Visual Studio to respect it.
```

ms.date: 11/29/2023
ms.topic: conceptual
---

# What's new for .NET 8 (Windows Forms .NET)

This article describes some of the new Windows Forms features and enhancements in .NET 8.

There are a few breaking changes you should be aware of when migrating from .NET Framework to .NET 8. For more information, see [Breaking changes in Windows Forms](/dotnet/core/compatibility/winforms).

## New default font

The default font is now the same as your Windows default font. This might affect the control layout used in your forms and controls. Previous versions of Windows Forms for .NET changed the default font to **Segoe UI, 9pt**. Windows Forms for .NET Framework uses **Microsoft Sans Serif, 8.25pt** as the default font.

If the font change affects the layout of your forms, and you don't want to adjust them, you can revert to either the older default .NET font or the default .NET Framework font by setting the `<ApplicationDefaultFont>` property in your project file:

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <!-- other settings -->

  <PropertyGroup>
    <ApplicationDefaultFont>Microsoft Sans Serif, 8.25pt</ApplicationDefaultFont>
  </PropertyGroup>

</Project>
```

> The Visual Studio designer respects the application's default font when set in the project file.

Reviewer 2: 👀 Is this a stray copy from .NET Core 3.x? Or has been a new default font added?
/cc: @merriemcgaw @dreddy-work

Reviewer: This was in early releases - I wonder if @adegeo got it from the highlights video I did for .NET Conf this year.

Author: Yes the video was hard to distinguish what is NEW vs what is different from Framework. So this sounds like there haven't been any other changes to font to .NET 8?

Reviewer 2: I haven't followed Windows Forms .NET 8 development train, so @merriemcgaw and @dreddy-work to confirm.
The mentioned here change was introduced in .NET Core 3.0 and it's documented [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/compatibility/winforms#default-control-font-changed-to-segoe-ui-9-pt).

:::image type="content" source="media/net80/commands.png" alt-text="The Visual Studio properties window highlighting a Windows Forms' Button's Command and CommandParameter properties.":::

Buttons also listen to the <xref:System.Windows.Input.ICommand.CanExecuteChanged%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> event, which causes the control to query the <xref:System.Windows.Input.ICommand.CanExecute%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method. When that method returns `true`, the control is enabled; the control is disabled when `false`is returned.

## Visual Studio DPI improvements

Visual Studio 2022 17.8 Introduces DPI-unwaware designer tabs. Previously, the Windows Designer tab in Visual Studio ran at the DPI of Visual Studio. This causes problems when you're designing a DPI-unaware Windows Forms app. Now you can ensure that the designer runs at the same scale as you want the app to run, either DPI-aware or not. Before this feature was introduced, you had to run Visual Studio in DPI-unaware mode, which made Visual Studio itself blurry when scaling was applied in Windows. Now you can leave Visual Studio alone and let the designer run DPI-unaware.

> You can force the DPI-unaware designer by adding the `<ApplicationHighDpiMode>` project setting and setting the value to `true`.

Reviewer 2: This sentence sounds wrong to me. Should it read `DPI-aware` instead?
The image right below it features a different property.

Reviewer 3: yes. this is not right. `ApplicationHighDpiMode` is not specific to .net8.0.  @merriemcgaw, Is intention publicize flag `ForceDesignerDpiUnaware` that is introduced in recent VisualStudio versions?

Author: Sorry, that was a copy paste error. The code snippet highlights the correct setting. I'll fix this,

> You can force the DPI-unaware designer by adding the `<ApplicationHighDpiMode>` project setting and setting the value to `true`.

Reviewer: That's not the correct way to set it to DPIUnaware mode - see [here ](https://github.com/dotnet/winforms/blob/e1393ed208a58a6a2f864ac5ae9cd8ae965d236c/docs/designer/designer-high-dpi-mode.md#L1)

:::code language="xml" source="./snippets/net80/csharp/snippets.csproj" range="3-11" highlight="7":::

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > After changing this setting, you must unload and reload your project to get Visual Studio to respect it.s

Reviewer 2: The sentence is incomplete.

## High DPI improvements

High DPI rendering with <xref:System.Windows.Forms.HighDpiMode.PerMonitorV2> has been improved:

- Correctly scale nested controls. For example, a button that's in a panel, which is placed on a tab page.
- Scale <xref:System.Windows.Forms.Form.MaximumSize?displayProperty=nameWithType> and <xref:System.Windows.Forms.Form.MinimumSize?displayProperty=nameWithType> properties based on the current monitor DPI settings.

>   Starting with .NET 8, this feature is enabled by default and you need to opt out of it to revert to the previous behavior.

Reviewer: We ended up leaving this as opt in, due to some instability with the designer code gen.

Reviewer 3: @merriemcgaw , not this one. This is `ON `by default if users target to .NET 8.0. Are you referring to new `AnchorLayout`?
